README.md, before:

# PyOC - Python OpenCommit CLI (Experimental)

PyOC is an AI-powered git commit message generator. This Python implementation provides the same functionality as the original Node.js OpenCommit tool with a clean, Pythonic interface.
This repo is in BETA/experimental stage there are many issues, much of it was auto-generated by AI. Use at your own risk!

## Table of Contents

- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Using pipx (Recommended)](#using-pipx-recommended)
  - [Using pip](#using-pip)
  - [Using UV](#using-uv)
  - [From Source](#from-source)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [Generate Commit Messages](#generate-commit-messages)
  - [Configure PyOC](#configure-pyoc)
  - [Setup Git Hooks](#setup-git-hooks)
  - [Using the Python Module Directly](#using-the-python-module-directly)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [Available Options](#available-options)
  - [Configuration File](#configuration-file)
  - [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)
- [Differences from Node.js Version](#differences-from-nodejs-version)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Installation

### Using pipx (Recommended)

[pipx](https://pypa.github.io/pipx/) is the recommended installation method for CLI tools as it installs the package in an isolated environment but makes it available globally.

```bash
pipx install pyoc
```

### Using pip

You can install PyOC using pip:

```bash
pip install pyoc
```

### Using UV

[UV](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) is a fast Python package installer and resolver.

```bash
uv install pyoc
```

### From Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ariel-frischer/py-opencommit.git
cd opencommit
uv venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
uv install -e .
```

## Usage

Once installed, PyOC CLI can be accessed with the `pyoc` command.

### Generate Commit Messages

Generate an AI-powered commit message from your staged changes:

```bash
# Generate commit message from staged changes
pyoc commit

# Generate commit message and automatically stage all changes
pyoc commit --stage-all

# Generate commit message with additional context
pyoc commit --context "This commit fixes the bug in the login form"

# Skip confirmation prompt
pyoc commit --skip-confirmation

# Pass additional arguments to git commit
pyoc commit -- -m "Custom message" --no-verify
```

#### Example Workflow

```
$ git add src/feature.py
$ pyoc commit
✨ Analyzing your changes...
📝 Generated commit message:
   feat: implement user authentication in login form

? Use this commit message? [Y/n] y
🎉 Commit successful!
```

### Configure PyOC

Configure the CLI settings:

```bash
# Show current configuration
pyoc config

# Set OpenAI API key
pyoc config --set api_key=sk-your-api-key

# Set preferred language
pyoc config --set language=en

# Set model
pyoc config --set model=gpt-3.5-turbo
```

### Setup Git Hooks

Set up git hooks for automatic commit message generation:

```bash
# Install git hooks in the current repository
pyoc githook --install

# Uninstall git hooks
pyoc githook --uninstall

# Show current hook status
pyoc githook --status
```

### Using the Python Module Directly

You can also run PyOC directly as a Python module without installing it globally. This is useful for:

- Using the tool without installing it globally
- Development and testing
- Running from source code

```bash
# Generate commit message from staged changes
python -m src.python.cli commit

# Generate commit message and automatically stage all changes
python -m src.python.cli commit --stage-all

# Generate commit message with additional context
python -m src.python.cli commit --context "This commit fixes the bug in the login form"

# Configure PyOC
python -m src.python.cli config --set api_key=sk-your-api-key

# Install git hooks
python -m src.python.cli githook --install
```

#### Example Workflow Using Python Module

```
$ git add src/feature.py
$ python -m src.python.cli commit
✨ Analyzing your changes...
📝 Generated commit message:
   feat: implement user authentication in login form

? Use this commit message? [Y/n] y
🎉 Commit successful!
```

## Configuration

PyOC can be configured through the CLI, a configuration file, or environment variables.

### Available Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `api_key` | The API key for the LLM provider (e.g., OpenAI) | None |
| `model` | The LLM model to use | gpt-3.5-turbo |
| `language` | The language for commit messages | en |
| `message_template` | Template for commit messages | None |
| `emoji` | Whether to include emoji in commit messages | true |
| `prompt_template` | Custom prompt template for the AI | Default template |

### Configuration File

The configuration file is located at:
- Linux/macOS: `~/.config/pyoc/config`
- Windows: `%USERPROFILE%\.config\pyoc\config`

Example configuration file:

```ini
[pyoc]
api_key = sk-your-api-key
model = gpt-3.5-turbo
language = en
emoji = true
```

### Environment Variables

You can also use environment variables to configure PyOC:

```bash
# Set API key
export OCO_API_KEY=sk-your-api-key

# Set model
export OCO_MODEL=gpt-3.5-turbo

# Set language
export OCO_LANGUAGE=en
```

## LiteLLM Integration

PyOC uses [LiteLLM](https://github.com/BerriAI/litellm) for interfacing with AI providers:

```
┌─────────┐     ┌───────────┐     ┌─────────────┐
│  PyOC   │────▶│  LiteLLM  │────▶│  OpenAI API │
└─────────┘     └───────────┘     └─────────────┘
```

Benefits of using LiteLLM:
- Unified interface to multiple LLM providers
- Error handling and retries
- Token counting and cost tracking
- Potential for future provider expansion

## Differences from Node.js Version

The Python CLI implementation aims to provide the same functionality as the Node.js version with some differences:

1. **LLM Provider Support**: Initially, only OpenAI is supported (via LiteLLM)
2. **Configuration Structure**: Uses INI format instead of JSON
3. **Command Structure**: Uses Click instead of Commander.js
4. **Package Management**: Uses UV instead of npm
5. **Performance**: May have different performance characteristics

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues
* All pytest tests are not passing

#### API Key Issues

```
Error: Invalid API key
```

Solution: Set your API key using:
```bash
pyoc config --set api_key=sk-your-api-key
```

Or set it as an environment variable:
```bash
export OCO_API_KEY=sk-your-api-key
```

#### Git Repository Issues

```
Error: Not a git repository
```

Solution: Make sure you're in a valid git repository. Run:
```bash
git init
```

#### No Staged Changes

```
Error: No staged changes to commit
```

Solution: Stage your changes before generating a commit message:
```bash
git add <files>
```

Or use the `--stage-all` option:
```bash
pyoc commit --stage-all
```

#### Large Diffs

```
Error: Diff too large for token limit
```

Solution: Commit changes in smaller batches or use a model with a larger context window:
```bash
pyoc config --set model=gpt-4-turbo
```

#### Configuration Errors

```
Error: Cannot read configuration file
```

Solution: Reinitialize the configuration:
```bash
pyoc config --init
```

### Debugging

For advanced debugging, set the debug environment variable:

```bash
OCO_DEBUG=1 pyoc commit
```

This will provide verbose output to help troubleshoot issues.

### Getting Help

If you encounter issues not covered here, please:

1. Check the [GitHub issues](https://github.com/ariel-frischer/opencommit/issues)
2. Run commands with verbose logging as shown above
3. Report issues on GitHub with the full debug output

### Notice
This repository was meant to be a python alternative to https://github.com/di-sukharev/opencommit
We have tried to emulate its functionality from typescript to python.
We have kept most of the original *.ts files for reference and for development if new features are added.

Commit message:

docs(README.md): update project description and add roadmap section
Clarify that PyOC is a port of the original OpenCommit tool from
Node.js to Python, providing similar functionality with a Pythonic
interface.

Introduce a roadmap section to outline future improvements,
including the removal of unimplemented TypeScript file references
and the implementation of core features from the original project.
This helps users understand the project's direction and
development plans.

README.md, after:

# PyOC - Python OpenCommit CLI (Experimental)

PyOC is an AI-powered git commit message generator. This is a port of https://github.com/di-sukharev/opencommit in python. The python implementation provides similar functionality as the original Node.js OpenCommit tool with a clean, Pythonic interface.
This repo is in BETA/experimental stage there are many issues, much of it was auto-generated by AI. Use at your own risk!



## Table of Contents

- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Using pipx (Recommended)](#using-pipx-recommended)
  - [Using pip](#using-pip)
  - [Using UV](#using-uv)
  - [From Source](#from-source)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [Generate Commit Messages](#generate-commit-messages)
  - [Configure PyOC](#configure-pyoc)
  - [Setup Git Hooks](#setup-git-hooks)
  - [Using the Python Module Directly](#using-the-python-module-directly)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [Available Options](#available-options)
  - [Configuration File](#configuration-file)
  - [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)
- [Differences from Node.js Version](#differences-from-nodejs-version)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

## Installation

### Using pipx (Recommended)

[pipx](https://pypa.github.io/pipx/) is the recommended installation method for CLI tools as it installs the package in an isolated environment but makes it available globally.

```bash
pipx install pyoc
```

### Using pip

You can install PyOC using pip:

```bash
pip install pyoc
```

### Using UV

[UV](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) is a fast Python package installer and resolver.

```bash
uv install pyoc
```

### From Source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ariel-frischer/py-opencommit.git
cd opencommit
uv venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
uv install -e .
```

## Usage

Once installed, PyOC CLI can be accessed with the `pyoc` command.

### Generate Commit Messages

Generate an AI-powered commit message from your staged changes:

```bash
# Generate commit message from staged changes
pyoc commit

# Generate commit message and automatically stage all changes
pyoc commit --stage-all

# Generate commit message with additional context
pyoc commit --context "This commit fixes the bug in the login form"

# Skip confirmation prompt
pyoc commit --skip-confirmation

# Pass additional arguments to git commit
pyoc commit -- -m "Custom message" --no-verify
```

#### Example Workflow

```
$ git add src/feature.py
$ pyoc commit
✨ Analyzing your changes...
📝 Generated commit message:
   feat: implement user authentication in login form

? Use this commit message? [Y/n] y
🎉 Commit successful!
```

### Configure PyOC

Configure the CLI settings:

```bash
# Show current configuration
pyoc config

# Set OpenAI API key
pyoc config --set api_key=sk-your-api-key

# Set preferred language
pyoc config --set language=en

# Set model
pyoc config --set model=gpt-3.5-turbo
```

### Setup Git Hooks

Set up git hooks for automatic commit message generation:

```bash
# Install git hooks in the current repository
pyoc githook --install

# Uninstall git hooks
pyoc githook --uninstall

# Show current hook status
pyoc githook --status
```

### Using the Python Module Directly

You can also run PyOC directly as a Python module without installing it globally. This is useful for:

- Using the tool without installing it globally
- Development and testing
- Running from source code

```bash
# Generate commit message from staged changes
python -m src.python.cli commit

# Generate commit message and automatically stage all changes
python -m src.python.cli commit --stage-all

# Generate commit message with additional context
python -m src.python.cli commit --context "This commit fixes the bug in the login form"

# Configure PyOC
python -m src.python.cli config --set api_key=sk-your-api-key

# Install git hooks
python -m src.python.cli githook --install
```

#### Example Workflow Using Python Module

```
$ git add src/feature.py
$ python -m src.python.cli commit
✨ Analyzing your changes...
📝 Generated commit message:
   feat: implement user authentication in login form

? Use this commit message? [Y/n] y
🎉 Commit successful!
```

## Configuration

PyOC can be configured through the CLI, a configuration file, or environment variables.

### Available Options

| Option | Description | Default |
|--------|-------------|---------|
| `api_key` | The API key for the LLM provider (e.g., OpenAI) | None |
| `model` | The LLM model to use | gpt-3.5-turbo |
| `language` | The language for commit messages | en |
| `message_template` | Template for commit messages | None |
| `emoji` | Whether to include emoji in commit messages | true |
| `prompt_template` | Custom prompt template for the AI | Default template |

### Configuration File

The configuration file is located at:
- Linux/macOS: `~/.config/pyoc/config`
- Windows: `%USERPROFILE%\.config\pyoc\config`

Example configuration file:

```ini
[pyoc]
api_key = sk-your-api-key
model = gpt-3.5-turbo
language = en
emoji = true
```

### Environment Variables

You can also use environment variables to configure PyOC:

```bash
# Set API key
export OCO_API_KEY=sk-your-api-key

# Set model
export OCO_MODEL=gpt-3.5-turbo

# Set language
export OCO_LANGUAGE=en
```

## LiteLLM Integration

PyOC uses [LiteLLM](https://github.com/BerriAI/litellm) for interfacing with AI providers:

```
┌─────────┐     ┌───────────┐     ┌─────────────┐
│  PyOC   │────▶│  LiteLLM  │────▶│  OpenAI API │
└─────────┘     └───────────┘     └─────────────┘
```

Benefits of using LiteLLM:
- Unified interface to multiple LLM providers
- Error handling and retries
- Token counting and cost tracking
- Potential for future provider expansion

## Differences from Node.js Version

The Python CLI implementation aims to provide the same functionality as the Node.js version with some differences:

1. **LLM Provider Support**: Initially, only OpenAI is supported (via LiteLLM)
2. **Configuration Structure**: Uses INI format instead of JSON
3. **Command Structure**: Uses Click instead of Commander.js
4. **Package Management**: Uses UV instead of npm
5. **Performance**: May have different performance characteristics

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues
* All pytest tests are not passing

#### API Key Issues

```
Error: Invalid API key
```

Solution: Set your API key using:
```bash
pyoc config --set api_key=sk-your-api-key
```

Or set it as an environment variable:
```bash
export OCO_API_KEY=sk-your-api-key
```

#### Git Repository Issues

```
Error: Not a git repository
```

Solution: Make sure you're in a valid git repository. Run:
```bash
git init
```

#### No Staged Changes

```
Error: No staged changes to commit
```

Solution: Stage your changes before generating a commit message:
```bash
git add <files>
```

Or use the `--stage-all` option:
```bash
pyoc commit --stage-all
```

#### Large Diffs

```
Error: Diff too large for token limit
```

Solution: Commit changes in smaller batches or use a model with a larger context window:
```bash
pyoc config --set model=gpt-4-turbo
```

#### Configuration Errors

```
Error: Cannot read configuration file
```

Solution: Reinitialize the configuration:
```bash
pyoc config --init
```

### Debugging

For advanced debugging, set the debug environment variable:

```bash
OCO_DEBUG=1 pyoc commit
```

This will provide verbose output to help troubleshoot issues.

### Getting Help

If you encounter issues not covered here, please:

1. Check the [GitHub issues](https://github.com/ariel-frischer/opencommit/issues)
2. Run commands with verbose logging as shown above
3. Report issues on GitHub with the full debug output

### Notice
This repository was meant to be a python alternative to https://github.com/di-sukharev/opencommit
We have tried to emulate its functionality from typescript to python.
We have kept most of the original *.ts files for reference and for development if new features are added.
Why did I port this? I wanted a full python dependency chain for my application, not requiring node kept a slim docker runtime container.

## Roadmap
- [ ] Remove older *.ts file references if they are not yet implelmented.
- [ ] Impelement most of the other core functionality of original opencommit.
